I got you babe.

OP, we have theories. The fun one that went around for a while was that he was a Stranger 12 who made everyone really fucking scared of him, so much so that they all thought it was best to leave him be. That idea's been dismissed from serious consideration (if ever it was there) for a number of reasons (including people immune to Stranger powers and certain phrasings), so here's what we do know.

The first person to ever mention him is Triumph, more than halfway through the story, in Queen 18.04:

    “Didn’t need doing in the first place,” Triumph said, sighing.  ”I was prepared to risk my life the day I graduated from the Wards.  Knew what I’d be getting into.  Week I had clearance, I watched all the video we have of the class S threats.  Leviathan, Simurgh, Behemoth, Slaughterhouse Nine, Nilbog, Sleeper. [...]"

At this point, we've heard of all the rest of these S-class threats, and have seen evidence of how terrifying each one of them is. And then this guy is mentioned. I won't say it had a Simurgh effect, because she was mentioned many times with very scary implications before we got to see her, but...still, it was pretty frightening.

From this we learn that Sleeper is fucking scary.

And that's all, for another eight arcs until Interlude 26 (Donation Bonus 1) otherwise known as Saint's Fucking Interlude:

    Secondary focuses.  Not the kind of targets that Dragon checked on with any regularity. [...] Sleeper was, as far as anyone could identify anything about the threat, dormant.

This is an interesting choice of words—one that, I'm going to argue, means exactly what it says. Wildbow is the type of author to be very careful with his plot design. He wouldn't decide to say only a few things about this guy and then not make sure they were airtight. Therefore, from this we learn that Sleeper is fucking scary even though he's not active enough to merit much Dragon-watching, and nobody knows much about him.

Later on in that same interlude, Fucking Saint checks on him again:

    Sleeper had shifted fractionally, but that wasn’t so rare.

From this we learn that Sleeper is fucking scary even though he's not active enough to merit much Dragon-watching, and nobody knows much about him, and he often moves a bit in his sleep.

And then we get this charming little bit in Extinction 27.2, with the Number Man telling everyone to shut the fuck up:

    "I’m saying that parahumans as a whole are chain reactions waiting to happen, and we were already approaching a critical point.  Every year, the percentage of parahumans in the population increases.  At that same time, the odds of a cataclysmic event happening somewhere are increasing steadily.  Imagine a situation like the Echidna event that turned out more unfavorably, or a Nilbog who wasn’t content to stay in one place.  We have the blasphemies, Sleeper, and the Ash Beast, even the Slaughterhouse Nine, all as living examples of this concept at work. The world already stood on a precipice, and I’m not even mentioning the Endbringers in all of this.”

Wonderful.

What's even more alarming in all of this is that the Three Blasphemies, frequently mentioned alongside Sleeper, are in that very room. And Sleeper isn't.

This is a room containing heroes and villains, Bonesaw and the Three Blasphemies. Other candidates for ending the world. Why? Because it also contains Contessa. And yet. It does not contain Sleeper.

This puts him on a whole other level, in some way or another. You could say he's just not very good at the talking thing and wouldn't help out much. But just remember that the Blasphemies didn't talk at all, and simply went on to bombard Europe when everyone was trying not to get Scioned. So it's not like they did much good.

It should also be noted that throughout this entire discussion, and forevermore thereafter, nobody ever expresses a desire to bring Sleeper into the fight, even though Cauldron's plan was just to have anyone there because it would raise their chances. Hell, they brought the fucking. End. Bringers.

And you know my girl PtV wouldn't let the dude go if he wouldn't increase their chances. Which seems to imply that he's either too scary, and/or his power is that uncontrolled.

From this we learn that Sleeper is fucking scary even though he's not active enough to merit much Dragon-watching, and nobody knows much about him, and he often moves a bit in his sleep, and he probably would have ended the world at some point if no one else beat him to it, and his presence at the Scion fight would lower their chances of victory.

Okay, that was a long one. Next time Sleeper is mentioned, our girl Taylor is talking to Sophia in jail when she gets this text message:

    Mordovia bubble hit. Sleeper has been roused, last tracked en route to Zayin portal. Casualties unknown.

This actually tells us quite a bit.

First off, Mordovia. It's apparently a place in Russia that got its shit fucked by Scion. I don't know what their bubble was, but it's safe to say that shit got popped.

Now, it's unclear whether Scion's shitfucking was what roused the Sleeper, or whether it was just the general chaos of, you know, the world ending. So we don't know if he was in Russia at the time. But if he was, and all Scion's shitfuck golden eraser laser did was wake the dude up?

Sheeeeeeit.

Some might say that's implied at best, but let's look at some of the other evidence, starting with "has been roused." Not "has risen" (which is actually creepy as balls); no, it's "has been roused." So the dude's name probably refers to his sleeping, yeah. And apparently, he can be awakened by certain things. Things like, for example, the world ending.

But you know why this is really scary. It's because, yeah, he can be awakened. But it's not easy enough that Dragon checks on him that often. Which means that what woke him up? Probably actually was Scion wiping the shit out of Mordovia.

And if that's not enough, remember: "casualties unknown." This didn't come after "Mordovia bubble hit"; it came after the whole thing. Which would seem to imply one of two things. Either the two events are related, in which case Sleeper was in fact woken up by Scion wiping out Mordovia, and just went along his merry way to a portal. Or that both the events—Scion lasering and Sleeper being awake—caused casualties of such a severe level that Cauldron, surveyors of all, could not count them. And let's not forget that Sleeper was "last tracked." Meaning he moves fast as balls, or he's that hard to pin down. And they also assumed from tracking him that he was en route to the portal. Meaning that it was just so close to him that it was the only thing he could be walking to...or that world-hopping is a frequent practice of his.

From this we learn that Sleeper is fucking scary even though he's not active enough to merit much Dragon-watching, and nobody knows much about him, and he often moves a bit in his sleep, and he probably would have ended the world at some point if no one else beat him to it, and his presence at the Scion fight would lower their chances of victory, and it's not that easy to wake him up but when he does wake up lots of people die.

Okay. Let's move on to a bit later. Cockroaches 28.1, right after YNWO. Eidolon bit it. Shit's fucked, as Aisha puts it, and the Undersiders (minus Paroil) and Canary are briefing Taylor on all the things going wrong:

    "Scion trounced some of our strongest capes and as far as we can tell, we didn’t even slow him down. We only gave him the bright idea of attacking other Earths, buying our world a few days at most, but we screw over a trillion other people in the process.  Might be they want to do something that isn’t futile, before humanity gets wiped out. [...] I’m going to keep going, just so you know what’s up. [...] Five? Sleeper on Zayin."

From this we learn that Sleeper is fucking scary even though he's not active enough to merit much Dragon-watching, and nobody knows much about him, and he often moves a bit in his sleep, and he probably would have ended the world at some point if no one else beat him to it, and his presence at the Scion fight would lower their chances of victory, and it's not that easy to wake him up but when he does wake up lots of people die, and his movements are worth mentioning at the end of the world, and even though Scion's hitting alternate Earths, he never ends up dying.

Fuck.

And to make matters worse, we get this five chapters later, in Cockroaches 28.5:

    Earth Zayin, too, was gone, subsumed by the Sleeper.

Um. What? Hello?

This is the quote everyone loves to reference, and rightly so. Not only is it terrifying, but the word "subsumed" is a very interesting one. The Oxford English Dictionary has quite a bit to say about it—mostly a few unlikely logic terms that basically amount to "assume." However, the more recent uses give us this very...eerie definition:

    a. To take up or absorb (a concept, thing, person, etc.) into another, esp. one which is larger or higher; to include in.

Well yeah, that's pretty freaky. To absorb an entire world, likely by virtue of being larger or higher. Fuck.

And then we have a definition someone (I forgot who) was trying to push for:

    b. To bring (an idea, principle, etc.) under another; to instance or include (a case, term, etc.) under a rule, category, etc.

I dunno, seems kinda weak, considering it's to be applied solely to ideas.

And the third definition is

    c. With simple object: to include, absorb, incorporate.





































    Fuck character limits.

So yeah, Sleeper basically ate Earth Zayin. Or at least made it his to the point where it was written off by anyone reasonable, if Taylor's attitude in Venom 29.9 is to be taken as such:

    The feeds showed the three key outposts where the PRT had a presence. The largest settlements that remained, the most obvious targets. There was one in Zayin, but the Sleeper had followed the refugees in there. Even if it still stood after Scion’s visit, there was no helping any of the refugees there.

From this we learn that Sleeper is fucking scary even though he's not active enough to merit much Dragon-watching, and nobody knows much about him, and he often moves a bit in his sleep, and he probably would have ended the world at some point if no one else beat him to it, and his presence at the Scion fight would lower their chances of victory, and it's not that easy to wake him up but when he does wake up lots of people die, and his movements are worth mentioning at the end of the world, and even though Scion's hitting alternate Earths, he never ends up dying and instead takes over an entire planet to the point where everyone else writes it off.

Next stop, Speck 30.4: Khepritown. That's right, it's Khepri, lord of the Sun, goddess of all she surveys—which is literally everything, ever.

And yet.

    Sleeper.

    I could see him, sitting on a lawn chair on a balcony, reading a book out loud to himself.

    More trouble than he was worth. I let him be.

This is the second-most referenced quote, and for good reason.

Khepri, whose sight and portals span worlds upon worlds, whose control can only truly be thwarted by the likes of Contessa and Glaistig Uaine...calls Sleeper more trouble than he's worth.

His brief moments of waking are enough to qualify him as a terror. Let alone his power to bring entire planets under his rule.

And he's not worth the trouble.

Nor, it seems, is he unduly concerned by the idea that Scion might come fuck his planet's shit up again.

(Edit: Also, as /u/melmonella says, Khepri's wording implies that Sleeper looks human, and the fact that she didn't die from seing him implies that his power doesn't work through vision/doesn't work through Clairvoyant.)

And finally, the last time he is ever mentioned is in Speck 30.5, after Khepri hurls Ash Beast at Scion:

    Take stock. Who didn’t I have? I didn’t have Contessa, who I couldn’t see. I didn’t have the Blasphemies, who hadn’t even registered to me because they weren’t human, even if they had powers, I didn’t have Sleeper and…

And she had no intention of grabbing him.

From this we learn that Sleeper is fucking scary even though he's not active enough to merit much Dragon-watching, and nobody knows much about him, and he often moves a bit in his sleep, and he probably would have ended the world at some point if no one else beat him to it, and his presence at the Scion fight would lower their chances of victory, and it's not that easy to wake him up but when he does wake up lots of people die, and his movements are worth mentioning at the end of the world, and even though Scion's hitting alternate Earths, he never ends up dying and instead takes over an entire planet to the point where everyone else writes it off, and that after he does so, he sits and reads a book aloud to himself on a lawn chair, completely relaxed while the world ends around him, and that he looks human, and that whatever his power is, it doesn't work through vision/doesn't work through Clairvoyant, because Khepri saw him and, oh yeah, judged him to be too much trouble to use against Scion, in a fight where capes on the order of Ash Beast were dispensable.

Fuuuuuuuuuuck that.

There's one more thing we know about him, and it's through Word of God. In this thread.

Basically, as /u/ughzubat says, everyone mentioned is laughably outclassed by Sleeper...except for maaaaaaaaybe someone like this:

    Can transform the atoms of any solid matter within 200 meters into a crystal-like organization. Chemically, this substance straddles the line between covalent crystal and metallic crystal: it is nearly as durable as carbon crystals (diamond and graphite) and is chemically inert, but has an extremely high melting point and is an excellent conductor of heat and electricity. This crystal effect slowly spreads through any connected solids after three seconds of sustained contact with an affected surface. Synergizes very well with her sister's ability [subsumes (heh) inanimate objects] and yours [lightning-state Breaker-Mover-Blaster], as this arrangement of atoms is both extremely durable and a good conductor. Manton limited against herself and any other biological matter.

This legend of The Girlfriend's Sister has, I think, not been examined enough. 1/36 is still very low, which leads me to believe that it has to do with creativity. But that could be way off-base, and you know what, I could go into it—very, very into it, as we've seen—but this took me two-and-a-half hours to write and I have an exam in like ten minutes that I haven't studied for much, so really, from all this we learn that r/parahumans needs a fucking wiki.

Good day to you all.

Edit: Exam situation was copacetic. Intro classes, for their part, aren't that difficult—and I was in a pretty analytical headspace.


Just archive stalking because another thread on Sleeper and the mystery was not solved in 4 more months. After reading your list of interactions the best I can interpret is that:

Sleeper quickly builds up a charge of <insert effect damaging to humans but not Scion> while sleeping. Waking him for the conference of horrors would mean losing the capes in the surrounding area plus consuming his power charge without benefit when he's either best left for later or best not used at all. He isn't a priority for Dragon to observe because, well, he's sleeping. If he's no longer sleeping there are easier signs to tell. He wasn't a priority KOS for Cauldron/PRT because he's left alone and sleeping means nonagressive which means no threat to the plan and casualties of combat are worse than leaving him asleep. He wasn't a priority for Khepri because even if he could be munchkinned to be useful in the Golden Morning he had already expended his power. His power is unlikely a reality shaper because Khepri used other capes to model Eden. And on the subject of the Golden Morning Scion v Russia woke him up which expended his charge leaving him vulnerable to heroes but he'd already "subsumed" the area to and through the portal of the Zayin colony which is why he's next observed awake and relaxed without fear of a threat. A one-shot also explains why he's safe to be observed by Dragon & Khepri.
